# Getting and Cleanning Data Codebook

Author: Cesar Lugo.
Version: 1.0 .
Version release date: February 19, 2016 .
Subject: Getting and Cleanning data, Data Science specialization, assignment.

## Study Design

This document describes the work created to get, clean and summarize some experimiental data that comes from a study 
that gathered information of some persons performing some activities while using some wearable
devices, which recorded some relevant information regarding those activities. The information generated
by this work in intended to create some selected tidy data summarizations which can be used in further
data analysis work, not included here.

The final result is to obtain a dataset (named selecteddataaverages here) that contains averages of
some selected data grouped by activity performed and by the subject who performed the activity.

The source data represent data collected from the accelerometers and gyroscopes from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. 
A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Here you can find the source data used in this project:

https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

All the source data referenced here is contained in the directory UCI HAR Dataset within the zip file.
Please note all directories and files referenced in this document below are mentions to a relative path to that UCI HAR Dataset directory.

As explained in the the "README.txt" file within that zip file, collected data was stored and made available to the public in multiple files. 
From those files, we used the main data, as follows:

- The "test" directory contains a portion of the gathered data, used for testing hypotesis performed on the data.
- The "train" directory contains another portion of the gathered data, used for some observation process leading to hypotesis creation.
- "features.txt" . I obtained from this file the variable names for each data colum of the "test/X_test.txt" and "train/X_train" files.
- "activity_labels". I used this file contents to assign a more descriptive name to each activity, in addition and per reference to the activity numeric code in the "test/X_test.txt" and "train/X_train" files.

from each of those directories, the analysis performed in this work process uses the following files:
- "test/X_test.txt". I obtained from this file the first portion of the data set.
- "test/subject_test.txt". I obtained from this file an additional column containing the subject who performed each the activity on the "test/X_test.txt" file.
- "test/y_test.txt". I obtained from this file an additional column containing the activity code of the activity performed each the activities measured on the "test/X_test.txt" file.

- "train/X_train.txt". I obtained from this file the first portion of the data set.
- "train/subject_train.txt". I obtained from this file an additional column containing the subject who performed each the activity on the "train/X_train.txt" file.
- "train/y_train.txt". I obtained from this file an additional column containing the activity code of the activity performed each the activities measured on the "train/X_train.txt" file.

All data from the directories named "Inertial Signals" was not considered in this work, because this information was already processed by the original authors into the other files I used, sumarized above.

To obtain the full dataset, I combined the test and train data into one dataset (mergeddata), selected some of the columns containing averages and standard deviations, and performed calculation of averages for each variable grouped by activity and subject, in 5 steps, as explained in the details section below.


## Codebook
This section describes the data generated in this work.

The data that was generated by this work was the result of the R script included in this github repository with the name "run_analysis.R",
and contains the final data generate in the selecteddataaverages dataframe that this funtion returns.

The resulting dataset contains the following variables (columns):

- activity. A numeric code that identifies one of the 6 activities the subjects performed while wearing the device. 1 for "WALKING", 2 "WALKING_UPSTAIRS", 3 "WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS", 4 "SITTING", 5 "STANDING", 6 "LAYING"
- activity.name . A descriptive name for the activity. The values are the names within "" described in the activity variable description.
- subject. An arbitrary numeric ID that uniquely identifies each subject (person) performing the activity meassured in each observation, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- time.body.accelerometer.magnitude.mean() . The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer, in Hz, , calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- time.body.accelerometer.magnitude.std() . The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- time.gravity.accelerometer.magnitude.mean() . The average of all means of time gravity magnitude meassured by the accelerometer, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- time.gravity.accelerometer.magnitude.std() . The average of all standard deviations of time gravity magnitude meassured by the accelerometer, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- time.body.accelerometer.jerk.magnitude.mean(). The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- time.body.accelerometer.jerk.magnitude.std(). The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 

- time.body.gyroscope.magnitude.mean() . The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope, in Hz, , calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- time.body.gyroscope.magnitude.std() . The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- time.body.gyroscope.jerk.magnitude.mean(). The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- time.body.gyroscope.jerk.magnitude.std(). The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 

- fast.fourier.transform.body.accelerometer.magnitude.mean(). The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- fast.fourier.transform.body.accelerometer.magnitude.std() . The average of all standard deviation of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.accelerometer.jerk.magnitude.mean(). The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals and then applied fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.accelerometer.jerk.magnitude.std(). The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the accelerometer and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals and then applied fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.gyroscope.magnitude.mean() . The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope, and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.gyroscope.magnitude.std() . The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope, and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair.
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.gyroscope.jerk.magnitude.mean() . The average of all means of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 
- fast.fourier.transform.body.body.gyroscope.jerk.magnitude.std() . The average of all standard deviations of time body magnitude meassured by the gyroscope and then derived in time to obtain Jerk signals, and then applied a fast fourier transform, in Hz, calculated for the specified activity and subject pair. 


## Script process details section

The run_analysis function contained here was created in this work, in order to read, process and generate the results described in the previous sections of this document.

You can find the corresponding run_anaysis R function source code in this repository, with the name "run_analysis.R".
In order to execute the R script, go to R, locate the directory where you downloaded the source zip file, 
where the "test" and "train" directories exists, and execute this command:
- run_analysis()

This function does the following R steps (further details below): 

Step 1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
Step 2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
Step 3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
Step 4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
Step 5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

The run_analysis is a function that receives no parameters. As a result, 
it returns an independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject (selecteddataaverages).
  
Step 0: First it validates that the user who calls the function is running the script from the approporate directory. Otherwise it lets you know where you should run it.
Step 1: Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
    
Step 1.1: Gather test data along with the activity code and subject information 
corresponding to each sample row, and assign the corresponding variable names as column headers:
    
	Read data labels from the features.txt file, which are contained in the second column.
	Read the test data from the test/X_test.txt file, which has no column names.
	Add variable names to xtest using the second column of datalabels table.
	Read the test activity numeric codes from "test/y_test.txt" and assign a variable name.
	Add a "testactivity" column to the xtest dataset to identify the activity of each row.
	Read the subject numeric codes from "test/subject_test.txt" and assign a variable name.
	Add a "testsubject" column to the xtest dataset to identify the activity of each row.

Step 1.2: Similarly, gather train data along with the activity code and subject information 
corresponding to each sample row, and assign the corresponding variable names as column headers:
    
	Read the train data from the train/X_train.txt file, which has no column names.
	Add variable names to xtrain using the second column of datalabels table.
	Read the train activity numeric codes from "train/y_train.txt".
	Add a "trainactivity" column to the xtrain dataset to identify the activity of each row.
	Read the subject numeric codes from "train/subject_train.txt" and assign a variable name.
	Add a "trainsubject" column to the xtest dataset to identify the activity of each row.

Step 1.3 Merge the xtrain and xtest dataframes into a new mergeddata dataset.	

Step 2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.

Step 2.1 Extract those columns into a new dataset called selecteddata.
Step 2.2 Add the corresponding activity and subject columns to the selecteddata dataframe.
    
Step 3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set:
  
Step 3.1 First extract the corresponding labes for each activity into a dataframe called activitynames.
Step 3.2 Add a column to selecteddata dataframe with the corresponding activity name. A findmyactivityname function is used to find the activity name of a corresponding activity code
    
Step 4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
Variable names in the selecteddata dataset are reanames according to the description of the features found on the features.info document, which reads as follows:
    
		"The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 
		Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 
		Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 
		These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
		'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions. "
    
Step 4.1 Rename the time domain signals into appropriate names according to the author's description referenced above.
Step 4.2 Rename the time domain signals magnitudes into appropriate names according to the author's description referenced above.
Step 4.3 Rename the fast fourier transform domain signals into appropriate names according to the author's description referenced above.

Step 4.4 Rename the fast fourier transform domain magnitudes into appropriate names according to the author's description referenced above

Step 5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.
I have included the activity.name in addition to the activity (and subject). It does not alter the grouping, and the contents are more clear to understand.
Eliminate the last 2 columns no longer needed, which do not contain numeric average data

You can find this run_anaysis function source code in this repository, with the name "run_analysis.R"